# Basic Rules

Here is a basic reference point. 

Most actions are decided by a Fudge role and it is the players who will
generally do the rolls. 

The basic chart of descriptions are: 

* Bad: -4 Dire, -3 Terrible, -2 Very Poor, -1 Poor, 0 Mediocre, 
* Good: 1 Fair, 2 Good,  3 Very Good, 4 Great, 5 Fantastic, 6+ Fantastic+... 

So to accomplish something, the GM will decide what is required to be
achieved, say a very good outcome, and what skill or attribute is relevant.
The player rolls the Fudge dice and adds the result to the skill. Depending on
how close or far from the desired minimum success, different narrative
outcomes can arise. 

Generally speaking, bad results lead to bad outcomes while good, but failing
leads to more of a null result. An outcome better than required might allow
for some flourish or something actually better. 

For some things, attempts can be repeated and/or are ongoing. For example,
picking a lock does not necessarily need to stop unless the lock or lock pick
gets broken or the players are discovered or ...  So the player can keep
rolling, maybe looking for some advantage. The GM will have in mind at which
point, if it gets low, that the endeavor fails. After each roll, the result
given becomes the starting point of the next attempt. 

So if one starts off at a +1 (Fair) for lock picking, rolls a +2, getting up
to Very Good, but Great is required, then the next roll will start at 3 and so
one needs just a +1 or better. Of course, one could roll, say, a -2 go back
down. 

For other events, we may have more of an opposed setup, particularly in
combat. So there might be two rolls happening each "round" with different
targets and the first one to hit the thresh hold succeeds. It can be also
simultaneous as well. Combat detailed a little bit later. 

## Fudge points

Players start the game with 5 fudge points. After each scene, fudge points,
often 1-3, may be awarded. 

Fudge points can be used to change roll by 1 per point or to make another
roll, either to add to previous roll (or subtract), or to replace. All
decisions should be made before rolling. 


## Skills, Attributes

See provided list for some sample skills. Each skill should be thought out by
the character as to what attribute it contributes to, if any. One at most.
Player choice with GM final word. 

Defense skills include shield, dodge, and parry.

The attributes are: Reasoning, Perception, Willpower, Strength, Agility,
Health

Attributes are used as broad skills and for character flavor. 

### Experience

Skills can gain in levels. There are different kinds of skills. Easy skills
default to Mediocre, Moderate to poor, Hard Skills at very poor, Very hard
Skills are at Terrible. One can advance any skill that is at least Mediocre.
To gain non-easy skills, some training is required, which depends on how hard
the skill is, roughly (1 week, 1 month, 1 year) of study for the different
skills. 


Once at Moderate level, then the skills advance generally through experience.
A skill gets an experience point each time an extreme roll is rolled for the
skill (+3, +4, -3, -4). The skill progression for easy is 2EP from Mediocre to
Fair, 4EP from Fair to Good, 8EP from Good to Very Good, ... The player must
keep track of this for each skill. The other kinds, double for each difficulty
level.

Roughly speaking, every 10 rolls should lead to an experience point.

Attributes also gain experience points in the same fashion, either from the
use of a skill using that attribute or from direct use of the attribute and an
extreme result.  But attributes gain levels at 10 times the amount of the
skills. So to go from the default of Mediocre, it takes 10EP to get to Fair.

### Starting

Create a backstory. From that, think about some basic skills that the
character would have; these start at fair. A player can have 6 levels worth
of harder skills starting at Mediocre. 

Pick two attributes that will be at fair, based on the skills and backstory. 

Gifts and faults add some more flavor and can give some bonuses or penalties
as well. In character creation, gifts and faults may be taken and they can be
there to balance one another out. 

An increased attribute can be a gift, but it requires decreasing an attribute
or two, depending on level. Nothing too extreme. 

## Combat

To hit a stationary target with no defense or weapon, it requires rolling a
good hit (+2). This results in a scratch/bruise, etc. 3 such hits leads to a
light hurt which will apply -1 to future results. After two more hits, it
becomes a deep hurt and a -2 results. The next hit is a critical and -3
results. Any further hits, debilitates a person, with potential bleeding to
death possible. Roll every minute, starting at health attribute, and a dire
result will lead to death. Any other roll leads to the next one starting at
that level. One more hit, kills. 

Combat is rolled by the players. The players figure their start level: weapon
to hit + skill + agility + any context bonuses including armor penalty. They
hit when their roll + level matches or exceeds opponent's defense + 2.  The
defense level is the defense skill + agility + context. The player's defense
level needs to stay above -2 + offense level of opponent. 

The levels after adding the rolls, carry from round to round until a hit
occurs. At that point, they reset though damage levels may occur.

Each round, a player can decide to add +2 to the offense or defense roll at
the cost of a -2 to the other. +1/-1 is also an option. The NPCs can do
likewise. 

If a hit occurs, add the level excess + weapon damage + strength and subtract
the armor defense + health of opponent. This is how many levels of hurt get
filled up. The max hit damage creeping up is a deep hurt. The damage beyond
deep hurt requires a +6 damage and each hit is per round. 

One can choose not to actually do a damage/reset if one wants, thereby
building up further damage for next round. 

If being attacked by multiple, -1 per attacker (group low level hordes
together). If attacking multiple targets, -1 per attack as well. 

